>> Woodruff: GOOD EVENING.
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
ON THE NEWSHOUR TONIGHT:
THE F.B.I. TAKES OVER THE
INVESTIGATION IN SAN BERNARDINO,
AS AN ACT OF TERRORISM--
NEW DETAILS ON THE
RADICALIZATION OF THE SHOOTERS.
THEN, WE SIT DOWN WITH THE U.S.
AMSSADBAOR TO THE UNITED
NATIONS, SAMANTHA POWER, TO TALK
REFUGEE RESETTLEMENT, TERROR
THREATS, AND MORE.
AND IT'S FRIDAY.
MARK SHIELDS AND DAVID BROOKS
ARE HERE, TO ANALYZE THE WEEK'S
NEWS.
PLUS, DIRECTOR SPIKE LEE ON HIS
NEW FILM TACLINKG URBAN
VIOLENCE, "CHI-RAQ:"
>> WE AS AMERICANS SHOULD NOT BE
OKAY WITH OUR YOUNG PEOPLE BEING
SHOT DOWN IN THE STREET.
>> Woodruff: ALL THAT AND MORE
ON TONIGHT'S PBS NEWSHOUR.
>> Woodruff: EVIDENCE IS
MOUNTING THIS EVENING THAT THE
KILLERS IN SAN BERNARDINO,
CALIFORNIA HAD BECOME HOME-GROWN
ISLAMIST RADICALS.
BUT IT IS NOT CLEAR THEY HAD
LINKS TO ANYONE ELSE.
THOSE FACTS EMERGED AS THE
F.B.I. LAUNCHED A FULL-BLOWN
FEDERAL INVESTIGATION.
>> WE ARE NOW INVESTIGATING
THESE HORRIFIC ACTS AS AN ACT OF
TERRORISM.
>> Woodruff: AFTER DAYS OF
QUESTIONS, A PARTIAL ANSWER--
BUT FEW DETAILS.
THE F.B.I.'S DAVID BOWDICH SAYS
THERE'S STILL MUCH THEY DON'T
KNOW ABOUT THE CARNAGE AT A
SOCIAL SERVICES CENTER.
THE KILLERS-- SYED RIZWAN FAROOK
AND HIS WIFE TASHFEEN MALIK--
TRIED TO COVER THEIR TRACKS.
>> THEY ATTEMPED TO DESTROY
THEIR DIGITAL FINGERPRINTS.
FOR EXAMPLE, WE FOUND TWO CELL
PHONES IN A NEARBY TRASH CAN.
THOSE CELL PHONES WERE ACTUALLY
CRUSHED.
WE HAVE RETAINED THOSE CELL
PHONES AND WE DO CONTINUE TO
EXPLOIT THE DATA FROM THOSE CELL
PHONES.
WE DO HOPE THAT THE DIGITAL
FINGERPRINTS THAT WERE LEFT BY
THESE TWO INDIVIDUALS WILL TAKE
US TOWARDS THEIR MOTIVATION.
>> Woodruff: IT ALSO TURNS OUT
THAT MALIK TOOK TO FACEBOOK AS
THE ATTACKS BEGAN, AND-- UNDER
AN ALIAS-- SHE PLEDGED
ALLEGIANCE TO ABU BAKR
AL-BAGHDADI, LEADER OF THE
ISLAMIC STATE GROUP.
>> WE HAVE NO WAY TO KNOW IF
THEY ARE PART OF A LARGER GROUP
OR FORMED A CELL.
THERE IS NO INDICATION THEY ARE
PART OF A NETWORK.
>> Woodruff: MORE NSKT EMERGED
ABOUT MALIK'S BACKGROUND.
PAKISTANI INTELLIGENCE OFFICIALS
SAID SHE MOVED FROM PAKISTAN AS
A CHILD WITH HER FAMILY TO
SAUDI ARABIA.
SHE MET FAROOK THERE IN 2014,
AND THEY WERE MARRIED LATER.THEE
LANDLORD LET REPORTERS INSIDE.
SOME NETWORKS AIRED THE FOOTAGE
ON LIVE TV.
INVESTIGATORS HAD ALREADY
FINISHED THEIR WORK THERE.
POLICE ALSO RELEASED THE
IDENTITIES OF ALL 14 PEOPLE
KILLED IN THE ATTACK, OVERNIGHT.
THEY RANGED IN AGE FROM 26 TO
60.
AMONG THEM, NICHOLAS THALASINOS,
WHO PASSIONATELY DEFENDED ISRAEL
AND REPORTEDLY ARGUED WITH
FAROOK-- AT WORK, ABOUT THE
NATURE OF ISLAM-- TWO WEEKS AGO.
MEANWHILE, MEMORIALS FOR THE
VICTIMS CONTINUED TO GROW IN SAN
BERNARDINO.
AND LAST NIGHT, THOUSANDS
ATTENDED A VIGIL AT A LOCAL
BASEBALL STADIUM.
LIGHTS WERE DIMMED AND
PARTICIPANTS HELD CANDLES, AS
THE NAMES OF THE VICTIMS WERE
READ.
FOR NOW, OFFICIALS SAY IT'S
STILL NOT CLEAR IF FAROOK AND
MALIK PLANNED OTHER ATTACKS.
BUT THERE'S NO INDICATION OF ANY
FURTHER THREATS IN THE U.S.
IN THE DAY'S OTHER NEWS, THE
GOVERNMENT'LATES ST JOBS REPORT
SHOWS THE U.S. ECONOMY TURNED IN
ANOTHER SOLID PERFORMANCE IN
NOVEMBER.
ACCORDING TO LABOR DEPARTMENT
NUMBERS, EMPLOYERS ADDED A NET
OF 211,000 JOBS IN NOVEMBER.
IN ADDITION, UNEMPLOYMENT
REMAINED STEADY AT 5%, THE
LOWEST IT'S BEEN IN 7.5 YEARS.
THE JOBS NEWS SENT WALL STREET
ROARING TO ITS BEST DAY SINCE
SEPTEMBER-- AND MADE UP
YESTERDAY'S LOSSES.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
GAINED 370 POINTS TO CLOSE NEAR
17,850.
THE NASDAQ ROSE MORE THAN 100
POINTS, AND THE S&P 500 ADDED
MORE THAN 40.
FOR THE WEEK, ALL THREE INDEXES
WERE UP A FRACTION OF A PERCENT.
THE ORGANIZATION OF THE
PETROLEUM EXPORTING COUNTRIES--
OR O.P.E.C.-- ANNOUNCED IT WILL
KEEP PUMPING RECORD VOLUMES OF
OIL INTO WORLD MARKETS.
THE DECISION TO MAINTAIN CURRENT
OUTPUT CAME DESPITE PRESSURE
FROM POORER MEMBER COUNTRIES TO
CURB SUPPLIES.
THE PRICE OF OIL HAS DROPPED BY
MORE THAN HALF IN THE LAST YEAR
AND A HALF.
ON THE SYRIA CONFLICT, SECRETARY
OF STATE JOHN KERRY SUGGESTED
TODAY, IT MIGHT BE ACCEPTABLE
FOR PRESIDENT BASHAR AL-ASSAD TO
STAY IN POWER-- IN THE SHORT
TERM.
IN GREECE, KERRY SAID ASSAD
STILL NEEDS TO GO EVENTUALLY, IF
THERE'S TO BE PEACE AND AN END
TO THE REFUGEE CRISIS.
>> AS HUMAN CATASTROPHE ON A
GIGANTIC SCALE AND ONE OF THE
REASONS WHY SO MANY PEOPLE FEEL
SO STRONGLY ASSAD COULDN'T FIND
LEGITIMACY IN THE FUTURE TO
GOVERNORERN WHEN THREE-QUARTZ IN
HIS COUNTRY HAS HAD TO GO
SOMEWHERE ELSE TO AVOID BARREL
BOMBING, GASSING AND STARVATION.
>> Woodruff: KERRY SUGGESTED
THAT THE WESTERN-BACKED REBELS
MIGHT EVEN COOPERATE WITH
SYRIA'S MILITARY AGAINST ISLAMIC
STATE MILITANTS-- PROVIDED
ASSAD'S FUTURE IS MADE CLEAR.
GERMANY WILL JOIN THE
INTERNATIONAL COALITION FIGHTING
ISLAMIC STATE FORCES IN SYRIA.
THE GERMAN PARLIAMENT
OVERWHELMINGLY APPROVED A PLAN
TODAY TO PROVIDE RECONNAISSANCE
PLANES, A NAVAL FRIGATE AND UP
TO 1,200 TROOPS.
THEY'LL SUPPORT AIR STRIKES, BUT
WILL NOT TAKE PART IN ACTUAL
COMBAT.
AND IN SOUTHERN AFGHANISTAN,
GOVERNMENT TROOPS FREED 60
PRISONERS FROM THE TALIBAN
OVERNIGHT, SUPPORTED BY U.S.
INTELLIGENCE AND SURVEILLANCE.
THE OPERATION TOOK PLACE IN
HELMAND PROVINCE.
MOST OF THOSE FREED WERE AFGHAN
POLICE AND ARMY OFFICERS.
AND, BACK IN THIS COUNTRY,
PRESIDENT OBAMA IS NOW POISED TO
SIGN A FIVE-YEAR TRANSPORTATION
BILL WORTH $305 BILLION.
IT WON FINAL APPROVAL LAST NIGHT
IN THE SENATE.
THE FIRST IN SIX YEARS.
THE BULK OF THE MONEY-- MORE
THAN $200 MILLION-- GOES TOWARD
MAINTAINING AGING ROADS AND
BUILDING NEW ONES, ESPECIALLY IN
MAJOR FREIGHT CORRIDORS.
THE BILL ALSO FUNDS MASS TRANSIT
SYSTEMS, PLUS AMTRAK AND OTHER
RAIL PROGRAMS.
LAWMAKERS OPTED NOT TO RAISE THE
FEDERAL GAS TAX.
STILL TO COME ON THE NEWSHOUR:
MY CONVERSATION WITH THE U.S.
AMBASSADOR TO THE UNITED
NATIONS; THE CONCLUSION OF OUR
SPECIAL SERIES, NIGERIA'S "PAIN
AND PROMISE;" MARK SHIELDS AND
DAVID BROOKS ON THIS WEEK'S
NEWS; AND SPIKE LEE ON HIS NEW
FILM, "CHI-RAQ."
>> Woodruff: THE CIVIL WAR IN
SYRIA ENTERED A NEW PHASE IN
RECENT MONTHS.
MILLIONS OF REFUGEES HAVE BEEN
DISPLACED, AS MORE COUNTRIES--
LIKE RUSSIA, FRANCE AND THE
UNITED KINGDOM-- ENTER THE
FIGHT.
AS WE SAW THIS WEEK, THE THREAT
OF RADICALIZATION BECAME REAL
HERE AT HOME.
SO HOW DOES ALL THIS LOOK TO
AMERICA'S TOP DIPLOMAT TO THE
UNITED NATIONS?
I SPOKE WITH SAMANTHA POWER A
SHORT TIME AGO.
AMBASSADOR POWER, WELCOME.
I WANT TO ASK YOU, FIRST, IN THE
WAKE OF THIS CONFIRMATION BY THE
F.B.I. TODAY THAT IT'S LOOKING
INTO THE SAN BERNARDINO
SHOOTINGS AS AN ACT OF
TERRORISM.
IN THEIR CONCERN ON THE PART OF
THE ADMINISTRATION THAT IT WAS
LATE TO RECOGNIZE THE THREAT
HERE ON U.S. SOIL?
>> WELL, LOOK, D.H.S., F.B.I.,
DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
PROFESSIONALS HAVE BEEN WORKING
24-7.
THERE HAVE BEEN A HUGE NUMBER OF
PLOTS AROUND THE WORLD AND A
NUMBER HERE THAT HAVE BEEN
DISRUPTED.
THESE ARE THE MOST PROFESSIONAL
PEOPLE AROUND IN TERMS OF
LOOKING OUT FOR AMERICAN
SECURITY.
I THINK THE INVESTIGATION IS
STILL PROGRESSING, SO IT'S A
LITTLE PREMATURE TO GO BEYOND
WHAT HAS BEEN SAID, AND ONCE WE
HAVE COME TO SOME CONCLUSIONS, I
KNOW PEOPLE WILL BE LOOKING BACK
AND PEOPLE WILL INSIST WE MAKE
SURE EVERYTHING WE CAN DO IS
BEING DONE.
>> Woodruff: I'M SURE YOU KNOW
OBSERVERS, CRITICS, INCLUDING
EVEN DEMOCRATS IS SAYING THAT
THE ADMINISTRATION NEEDS TO HAVE
A MORE DEFEAT I.S.I.S. STRATEGY
RATHER THAN A CONTAIN I.S.I.S.
STRATEGY WHICH IS THE LANGUAGE
THE PRESIDENT WAS USING UNTIL
JUST A FEW DAYS AGO.
>> WELL, FROM THE BEGINNING OF
THE CAMPAIGN, OUR SLOGAN, AS IT
WERE, HAS BEEN DEGRADE AND
DESTROY, DEGRADE AND DEFEAT.
THE CHALLENGE, OF COURSE,
INTERNATIONALLY, IS THAT I.S.I.L
HAS ROOTED ITSELF IN POPULATIONS
THAT NEED TO BE CONTESTED ON THE
GROUND.
THEIR FINANCING HAS TO BE CUT
OFF, WHICH I THINK WE'VE MADE
SIGNIFICANT PROGRESS ON EVEN IN
RECENT DAYS AND HOPE TO MAKE
MORE PROGRESS ON LATER IN THE
MONTH AT THE SECURITY COUNCIL
WHEN JACK LOU CHAIRS THE
SECURITY COUNCIL AND TIGHTENS
THE SCREWS ON I.S.I.L FINANCING.
WE HAVE TO DEAL WITH THE
MESSAGING.
AND IN COMMUNITIES WHERE PEOPLE
ARE ALIENATED, IT'S GOT TO BE A
WHOLE OF NATION EFFORT WHERE
CITIZENS AND FAMILIES ARE MUCH
MORE ATTUNED TO WHAT MIGHT BE
GOING ON IN THEIR OWN
HOWLSHOLDS, NEVER MIND THEIR OWN
COMMUNITIES AND CITIES.
>> Woodruff: FROM A DIPLOMATIC
POINT OF VIEW, CAN AN
ANTI-I.S.I.S. COALITION SUCCEED
IF THE COUNTRIES IN THE REGION
AROUND SYRIA, AROUND IRAQ ARE
THEMSELVES NOT COMMITTED?
I'M SPEAKING ABOUT RUSSIA AND
TURKEY.
>> WELL, CERTAINLY WE NEED
EVERYBODY COMMITTED, AND I THINK
IN TURKEY YOU SEE MORE OF A
STEPPED-UP EFFORT, AN
ACCELERATED EFFORT IN RECENT
WEEKS AS THE I.S.I.L THREAT HAS
COME HOME WITH THE KILLING OF
HUNDREDS OF TURKISH CITIZENS,
TRAGICALLY, YOU'VE SEEN A
STPED-EPUP EFFORT IN TERMS OF
CLOSING OFF THE LAST STRETCH OF
THE TURKISH BORDER.
THAT'S A REALLY IMPORTANT
OPERATION AND NEEDS TO BE
COMPLETED.
YOU'VE SEEN MORE ARRESTS.
IN RUSSIA, OF COURSE, YOU HAVE
THE FACT I.S.I.L CLAIMED
RESPONSIBILITY FOR PLANT AGO
BOMB THAT KILLED SO MANY RUSSIAN
INNOCENT CIVILIANS THAT YOU
STILL HAVE RUSSIAN AIR POWER
BEING DEPLOYED MAINLY AGAINST
MODERATE OPPOSITION GROUPS AND
MAINLY IT SEEMS WITH INTENTION
OF PROPPING UP THE ASSAD REGIME.
SO A LOT MORE PROGRESS NEEDS TO
BE MADE THERE.
THE VIENNA PROGRESS SUGGESTS
THAT RUSSIA IS BEGINNING TO
REALIZE IT'S BITTEN OFF MORE
THAN IT CAN CHEW ON THE GROUND
AND THAT DEFECT OF HITTING --
NOT REALLY HITTING I.S.I.L AND
HITTING THESE OTHER GROUPS ISN'T
REALLY WORKING.
THEY HAVE TAKEN VERY LITTLE
TERRITORY EVEN THOUGH THEY'RE
BOMBING LIKE CRAZY.
SO WE'RE HOPEFUL THEIR
ENGAGEMENT IN THE VIENNA PROCESS
AROUND A POLITICAL TRANSITION
AND CONSTANT DIALOGUE ABOUT WHO
IS I.S.I.L, WHO IS THE REAL
THREAT TO RUSSIAN CITIZENS,
AMERICAN CITIZENS AND TO
CITIZENS AROUND THE WORLD, THAT
WE'LL BE ABLE TO NARROW THE GAPS
THAT HAVE NOT BEEN HELPFUL, AS
YOU SAY.
>> Woodruff: IN CONNECTION
WITH THAT, WE NOTED SECRETARY
KERRY SAID ABOUT SYRIA AND WITH
RESPECT TO THE RUSSIANS, WITH
RESPECT TO PRESIDENT ASSAD AND
THE TIMING, THEY S.A.T. IT IS
NOT CLEAR HE WOULD HAVE TO GO IF
THERE IS CLARITY AS TO WHAT HIS
FUTURE MAY OR MAY NOT BE.
CAN YOU EXPAND ON THAT?
>> I THINK ALL THE SECRETARY WAS
SAYING WAS JUST REPEATING OUR
POSITION WHICH IS,
FUNDAMENTALLY, THE POLITICAL
TRANSITION NEEDS TO COME ABOUT
BY MUTUAL CONSENT.
WE NEED RUSSIA AND IRAN TO HELP
BRING CONSENT ON ONE SIDE AND
NEED THE MODERATE OPPOSITION TO
ENGAGE AND BELIEVE IN A
POLITICAL TRANSITION.
IT HAS ALWAYS BEEN INCUMBENT,
ULT RI, ON THE PARTIES WITH US
PRODDING THEM AND NUDGING THEM,
YOU KNOW, TO COME TO AN
AGREEMENT ABOUT THE PRECISE
TIMELINE.
I THINK ALL SECRETARY KERRY WAS
SAYING IS WE NEED TO KNOW THAT
TIME LINE.
THERE IS NO SCENARIO WHERE WE
CAN REALLY DURABLY END THE FLOW
OF FOREIGN FIGHTERS TO SYRIA,
STABILIZE THE COUNTRY, REALLY
GET THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
UNITED AROUND THE ANTI-I.S.I.L
FIGHT FOR AS LONG AS THERE IS AM
BY DUTY ABOUT WHAT ASSAD'S TIME
HORIZON IS.
SO HE HAS TO GO, PEOPLE HAVE TO
KNOW WHEN HE GOES, AND WE HAVE
TO WORK THE SPECIFICS ON THE
TIMELINE.
>> Woodruff: LET ME ASK YOU
ABOUT THE REFUGEES.
WE KNOW THEIR PLIGHT IS AS DIRE
AS IT EVER HAS BEEN, FLEEING
SYRIA, AFGHANISTAN, IRAQ, AND
OTHER COUNTRIES, BUT SINCE THE
PARIS ATTACKS, HOW WORRIED ARE
YOU THAT THE WILLINGNESS OF
EUROPEAN COUNTRIES TO TAKE THEM
IN IS NOW SERIOUSLY DIMINISHED?
>> WELL, I THINK IT'S NOT JUST
THE PARIS ATTACKS.
IT'S, OF COURSE, ABSORBING
NEARLY 100 MILLION REFUGEES, I
THINK 865,000 RE 865,000 REFUGEE
IN THE LAST CALENDAR YEAR.
IT'S A LOT FOR ANY SOCIAL
SERVICES, ANY POLITICS, IT'S A
LOT OF PEOPLE TO ABSORB.
YOU'RE STILL SEEING, YOU KNOW,
PEOPLE LIKE CHANCELLOR MERKEL
AND PRESIDENT HOLLANDE EVEN IN
THE WAKE OF PARIS STICKING TO
THEIR COMMITMENTS, RECOGNIZING
WE HAVE A RESPONSIBILITY TO
PEOPLE, TO THESE FAMILIES WHO
ARE JUST DESPERATE, PARENTS WHO
ARE LOOKING AT THEIR KIDS NOT
HAVING ACCESS TO SCHOOL AND FOOD
AND FEELING THEY HAVE NO CHOICE
BUT TO GET ON THESE BOATS AND
TRUST THE SMUGGLERS AND LEAVE
THEIR FATE TO THE STARS AND TO
GOD TO TRY TO PUT THEM IN A
BETTER PLACE.
SO WE HAVE TO BE PART OF SHARING
THAT BURDEN HERE IN THENITE UD
STATES.
WE ARE IN A DIFFERENT POSITION
THAN THE EUROPEAN COUNTRIES ARE
IN THE SENSE THAT WE HAVE AMPLE
TIME TO SCREEN REFUGEE FILES, TO
INTERVIEW REFUGEES.
THE BURDEN OF PROOF IS ON
REFUGEES TO SHOW THEY'RE NOT THE
THREAT.
WE HAVE THE F.B.I., EVERYONE
HAVING TO VOUCH ON THE FILES OF
THE FAMILIES AS THEY COME
FORWARD, AND THE VAST MAJORITY
OF THOSE WHO COME FROM THE
UNITED STATES, A FEW FROM SYRIA,
HAVE BEEN FAMILIES, SINGLE,
UNATTACHED MEN, UNATTACHED TO
FAMILIES AND SO FORTH.
SO WE'RE LOOKING AT THE MOST
VULNERABLE BUT DEFINITELY
LOOKING AT TRYING TO DO OUR
SHARE AND TO REMIND PEOPLE HOW
CENTRAL REFUGEES AND IMMIGRANTS
OF ALL KINDS HAVE BEEN TO THE
BUILDING OF THIS GREAT COUNTRY.
>> Woodruff: BUT I KNOW YOU
KNOW ON THE CAMPAIGN TRAIL MANY
OF THE CANDIDATES FOR PRESIDENT
ARE SAYING THERE MUST BE TIGHTER
LIMITS, RESTRICTIONS ON THE
REFUGEES TO GET INTO THE U.S.
WHAT ARE THE
MEANTIME, SEPARATE ACTION IN
CONGRESS BIPARTISAN TO TIGHTEN
TEMPORARY VISA WAIVER LANGUAGE.
>> LET ME STRESS, PRESIDENT
OBAMA'S CHIEF PRIORITY IS
KEEPING THE AMERICAN PEOPLE
SAFE, AND WE WOULD NOT BE COMING
FORWARD WITH THE PROPOSAL TO
INCREASE THE NUMBER OF SLOTS FOR
REFUGEES TO COME TO THIS COUNTRY
IF WE DIDN'T THINK WE COULD DO
SO IN A MANNER TO KEEP THE
AMERICAN PEOPLE SAFE AND WHERE
THE SECURITY VETTING, WHERE WE
HAD CONFIDENCE THE SECURITY
VETTING IS SUFFICIENT.
THE REFUGEE POPULATION IS
SCREENED MORE CAREFULLY THAN ANY
OTHER POPULATION THAT COMES INTO
THIS COUNTRY.
SO IT'S INCUMBENT ON US TO
DESCRIBE THAT VETTING, TO GIVE
THEM CONFIDENCE, BUT IT'S ALSO,
I THINK, INCUMBENT ON FOLKS IN
ALL POLITICAL CORRIDORS TO
REFLECT, AGAIN, ON HOW WE FEEL
AS A COUNTRY ABOUT THE TIMES
WHERE WE HAVE SHUT OUR DOORS AND
WHERE WE'VE LET THE SPECTER OF A
THREAT THAT WAS NOT MOORED IN
FACT DETER US.
WE NEED TO STEP UP AND MAKE SURE
WE DO IT COMPAT WBL THE SAFETY
OF THE AMERICAN PEOPLE.
I THINK WE CAN GET THERE.
>> Woodruff: AMBASSADOR
SAMANTHA POWER, AMBASSADOR TO
THE UNITED NATIONS.
WE THANK YOU.
>> THANK YOU, JUDY.
>> Woodruff: ALL THIS WEEK,
NEWSHOUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
NICK SCHIFRIN BROUGHT US STORIES
FROM NIGERIA, A SERIES WE'VE
CALLED "PAIN AND PROMISE."
HE REPORTED ON THE COUNTRY'S
FIGHT AGAINST BOKO HARAM;
TRACKED ITS ECONOMIC BOOM;
DETAILED THE DEPTHS OF NIGERIA'S
CORRUPTION, AND THE ABUSE OF
GAYS.
WE END THE SERIES WITH A
CONVERSATION.
AND TO WILLIAM BRANGHAM.
I'M JOINED BY NICK SCHIFRIN
AND NIE GENERAL NOVELIST
CHIMAMANDA NGOZI ADICHIE, WHOSE
BOOK, "AMERICANAH," TELLS THE
STORY OF A YOUNG NIGERIAN WOMAN
WHO COMES TO THE U.S. FOR
EDUCATION.
YOU'VE SEEN THIS WEEK WE HAVE
BEEN REPORTING ON YOUR HOME
NATION OF NIGERIA AND TRYING TO
GET AN UNDERSTANDING OF THE
COUNTRY, YOU OBVIOUSLY KNOW MUCH
MORE ABOUT THE COUNTRY THAN WE
COULD.
WHAT IS IT YOU THINK AMERICANS
NEED TO LEARN ABOUT NIGERIA?
>> I THINK NIGERIA IS A PLACE
THAT IS VERY COMPLEX.
IT'S AFRICA'S MOST POPULOUS
NATION AND IT REALLY IS
INCREDIBLY DIVERSE.
THE NORTH AND THE SOUTH CAN FEEL
LIKE TWO DIFFERENT COUNTRIES.
THE STORY ABOUT NIGERIA THAT'S
TOLD IN THE NEWS IS BOKO HARAM.
THERE IS A LOT PEOPLE LIKE ME
DON'T NECESSARILY UNDERSTAND AND
THEY HAVE THE IDEA EVERY
NIGERIAN IS SOMETHING THAT I
THINK NEEDS TO BE --
>> Brangham: CORRECTED?
YES.
I HATE TO SOUND LIKE A HEAD
MISTRESS.
MUST BE CORRECTED.
>> Brangham: THIS HAS BEEN A
PROBLEM FOR THE UNITED STATES
AND MANY MIDWESTERN COUNTRIES IN
THAT WE ONLY PAY ATTENTION WHEN
A BOMB GOES OFF OR THERE IS A
CONFLICT.
YOU'VE SPENT TIME IN THE U.S.
AND A GOOD DEAL IN NIGERIA, DO
YOU THINK WE'RE COMING TO AN
UNDERSTANDING AND LOOKING AT
NATIONS NOW NOT JUST THROUGH
THIS LENS OF CRISIS?
>> I THINK SOME PROGRESS HAS
BEEN MADE BUT I THINK MORE COULD
BE DONE.
SO AN EXAMPLE I WAS JUST
THINKING ABOUT, WOMEN AND
GENDER, NIGERIA IS IN THE NEWS
RECENTLY BECAUSE OF THE GIRLS --
>
>> Brangham: THE GIRLS
ABDUCTED LAST YEAR BY BOKO
HARAM.
>> YES.
AND MANY MORE GIRLS, NOT JUST
THEM, AND BOYS WERE ABDUCTED.
THERE IS A NARROW STORY ABOUT A
FEW GIRLS BEING ABDUCTED, BUT
MORE INTERESTING IT BECAME A
NIGERIA-WIDE GIRLS.
PEOPLE ASKED ME ABOUT THOSE
GIRLS AND THE EDUCATION OF
GIRLS.
IT'S ACTUALLY BOYS NOT BEING
EDUCATED WHERE I COME FROM.
IN SOUTHEASTERN NIGERIAIA, THE
RATE OF EDUCATION IS HIGHER
AMONG GIRLS THAN BOYS.
THAT'S NOT THE CASE IN THE
COMPLEXITY IN
THE COUNTRY IS NOT SO MUCH
MISUNDERSTOOD AS NOT EVEN KNOWN
ABOUT IN THE U.S.
>> Brangham: NICK, YOU HELPED
DRIVE THE REPORTING IN A BIG
WAY.
WHY DID YOU CHOOSE TO GO TO
NIGERIA IN THE FIRST PLACE?
>> I THINK IT'S IMPORTANT
AMERICANS UNDERSTAND HOW
IMPORTANT NIGERIA IS.
NOT ONLY IS IT AFRICA'S MOST
POPULOUS NATION.
IT'S A FAST-GROWING NATION AND A
FAST-GROWING ECONOMY AND THE
U.S.'S NUMBER ONE TRADING
PARTNER.
THERE WILL BE MORE NIGERIANS BY
2050 THAN AMERICANS, AND THE
U.S. HAS A HUGE STAGE IN NIGERIA
AND VICE VERSA.
THERE IS A LOT OF COOPERATION
NOW HAPPENING BETWEEN THE U.S.
AND NIGERIAN GOVERNMENT THAT'S
NEW, AND THERE IS A REAL NEED, I
THINK, FOR CERTAINLY WEST AFRICA
AND NIGERIA FOR AMERICANS TO
HAVE A LITTLE MORE UNDERSTANDING
AND EMPATHY WITH A COUNTRY OFTEN
DEPICTED IN A SINGULAR LENS.
>> Brangham: YOU'RE REPORTING
TOUCHES ON THE ISSUE OF
CORRUPTION AND PRESENT HARROWING
STORIES FROM COPS SHAKING DOWN
CITIZENS ON THE STREET TO THE
TOP TO HIGH-LEVEL GOVERNMENT
CORRUPTION.
DID YOU REALLY FIND IT THAT
PERVASIVE?
AND WHAT DOES THAT DO TO A
SOCIETY?
>> IT HELPS CREATE BOKO HARAM.
THAT'S REALLY WHAT HAPPENS.
THE ANSWER TO YOUR FIRST
QUESTION IS YES.
NOW, YOU KNOW, I'M NOT NIGERIAN.
I DON'T EXPERIENCE THIS ON A
DAILY BASIS.
MANY DO.
I THINK IT'S IMPORTANT TO POINT
OUT IT'S DIFFERENT IN DIFFERENT
AREAS.
THERE IS PLACES WHERE COPS ARE
WORSE AND PLACE WHERE THE COPS
ARE BETTER.
THERE HAS BEEN AN IMPROVEMENT IN
THE LAST FEW MONTHS WITH A REAL
ALMOST SINGLE FOCUS BY THE
PRESIDENT --
>> Brangham: HIS CAMPAIGN TO
RID CORRUPTION.
>> VERY HIGH-PROFILE, SINGULAR
FOCUS ON CORRUPTION.
>> Brangham: CHIMAMANDA NGOZI
ADICHIE, I KNOW YOU'VE SPOKEN
HOW DEEPLY RELIGIOUS YOUR
COUNTRY IS, FUNDAMENTALIST ISLAM
IN THE NORTH AND EQUALLY
FUNDAMENTALLEST CHRISTIAN IN THE
SOUTH.
HOW IS THAT FELT IN THE DAILY
LIVES OF NIGERIANS?
>> FIRST OF ALL, I THINK THERE
ARE DIFFERENT KINDS THAT STARRED
IN NIGERIA IN THE EARLY 1980s
AND I THINK A LOT OF IT STARTED
WHEN THE ECONOMY WENT DOWN.
SO LIFE GOT MORE DIFFICULT,
PEOPLE GOT MORE RELIGIOUS.
FOR THE CHRISTIANS -- AND I CAN
TALK ABOUT CHRISTIANITY MORE
BECAUSE THAT'S WHAT I KNOW --
PEOPLE STARTED GOING TO
PENTECOSTAL CHURCHES.
THE MORE ORTHODOX CHRISTIANITY
WERE ABANDONED, CATHOLICISM, AND
PEOPLE WENT TO MORE PROSPERITY
PREACHING.
IT CLOSES OUR MINDS.
THERE IS FUNDAMENTALISM ON BOTH
SIDES.
ISLAMIC FUNDAMENTAL I'M WHICH IS
HORROR, AND BOKO HARAM.
AND CHRISTIAN FUNDAMENTALISM
WHICH IS ALSO SUCH THINGS AS
WHAT WE CALL THE ANTI-GAY LAW IN
NIGERIA.
>> Brangham: THERE IS A
UNIFICATION BETWEEN CHRISTIAN
AND MUSLIM LEADERS, WHICH IS
GENERALLY IN THE SOUTH AND
NORTH, AGAINST HOMOSEXUALITY,
AND COMBINED, THOSE POWERS
REALLY PUSH THE POLITICIANS, WHO
ALREADY BELIEVE THAT BUT PERHAPS
DEFINITELY PUSH THEM TO PASS
THIS BILL LAST JANUARY, SAME-SEX
MARRIAGE PROHIBITION ACT.
NOBODY'S BEEN SENTENCED UNDER
THE BILL.
NOT ONLY CAN YOU BE 14 YEARS FOR
BEING GAY, YOU HAVE 10 YEARS AS
A PARENT IF YOU DON'T KNOWINGLY
TURN IN YOUR GAY SON OR DAUGHTER
IF HE OR SHE IS OUT, AND THEY
CAME TOGETHER AND PUSHED THAT.
ONE QUICK POINT, THOUGH,
FUNDAMENTALISM IS SEPARATE.
I MEAN, NORTHERN NIGERIA IS
ISLAMIC, BUT THERE IS A LOT OF
PEOPLE WHO AREN'T
FUNDAMENTALISTS.
I THINK THAT'S JUST IMPORTANT TO
SAY THAT BOKO HARAM'S VICTIMS,
ONLY THREE-QUARTERS OF THEM ARE
MUSLIM.
I THINK MOS -- I THINK IT'S
IMPORTANT TO SAY MOST OF THE
PEOPLE WHO ARE VICTIMIZED BY
BOKO HARAM AND HAVE TO FIGHT
BOKO HARAM ARE MUSLIM AND ARE
FIGHTING THAT FUNDAMENTALISM.
>> Brangham: CHIMAMANDA NGOZI
ADICHIE AND NICK SCHIFRIN, THANK
YOU VERY MUCH FOR BEING HERE.
>> Woodruff: BACK IN THE U.S.,
IT HAS BEEN A FULL WEEK OF NEWS.
THE SAN BERNARDINO SHOOTING ONCE
AGAIN SPARKED A POLITICAL DEBATE
ON GUNS AND TERROR, WHILE PAUL
RYAN ENDED HIS FIRST MONTH AS
SPEAKER OF THE HOUIT
MAJOR POLICY SPEECH.
THAT BRINGS US TO THE ANALYSIS
OF SHIELDS AND BROOKS.
THAT'S SYNDICATED COLUMNIST MARK
SHIELDS AND "NEW YORK TIMES"
COLUMNIST DAVID BROOKS.
WELCOME, GENTLEMEN.
ANOTHER WEEK, ANOTHER SHOOTING.
NOW WE ARE LEARNING FROM THE
F.B.I. THAT THEY ARE CONSIDERING
THIS A TERRORIST INCIDENT.
THEY'RE GOING TO FOCUS ON IT
THAT WAY.
WE'RE ALREADY HEARING, MARK AND
DAVID, COMMENTS, DIFFERENT KINDS
OF SOLUTIONS FROM DIFFERENT
SIDES OF THE POLITICAL AISLE.
REPUBLICANS ARE SAYING TOO MUCH
FOCUS ON GUNS, THE
ADMINISTRATION ISN'T DOING
ENOUGH TO FIGHT TERRORISM.
DO YOU SEE ANY KIND OF
CONSENSUS?
>> I DON'T SEE WHY IT'S AN
EITHER-OR THING.
IT'S ADDITIVE, NOT ALTERNATIVE.
THE GUNS, AS YOU KNOW, I DON'T
SEE WHY PEOPLE NEED TO BE
CARRYING THESE KINDS OF GUNS
THAT WERE USED IN THIS KIND OF
ATTACK.
SOME LEGISLATION, I DON'T KNOW
IF IT WILL PREVENT THIS.
THERE ARE 250 MILLION GUNS IN
THIS COUNTRY, IT'S HARD TO
CONTROL GUN USAGE.
NONETHELESS, I COULDN'T HURT.
BUT WHAT'S UNIQUE ABOUT THIS ISS
IT IS SORT OF I.S.I.S.-INSPIRED.
THAT LEADS TO TWO CONCLUSIONS.
FIRST, I.S.I.S. HAS CHARISMA.
IF YOU ARE A CERTAIN PERSON WITH
A CERTAIN MENTALITY, SUDDENLY
YOU WANT TO LATCH ON AND SWEAR
ALLEGIANCE TO I.S.I.S. AND YOU
WANT TO GO OUT AND KILL PEOPLE.
TAKING AWAY SOME OF I.S.I.S.'S
CACHARISMA BY HANDING THEM DEFET
ON THE BATTLEFIELD SEEMS A PATH.
WE'LL HAVE MORE RELIGIOUS
ATTACKS THAN IN THE PAST BECAUSE
THERE ARE MORE RELIGIOUS PEOPLE
WHO ARE MOTIVATED BY A
POLITICIZED FORM OF RELIGION.
IT'S NOT A REAL FAITH, IT'S
POLITICIZED.
YOU HAVE MY GROUP AND THERE IS
THE OTHER GROUP AND I'M GOING TO
SHOOT UP EVIL PEOPLE IN THE
OTHER GROUP.
TO ME, WHEN YOU HAVE THAT TYPE
OF RELIGIOUS, POLITICAL
FANATICISM, IT GOING TO TAKE
RELIGIOUS VOICES TO COMBAT IT
AND SAY WE LOVE PEOPLE IN OUR
GROUP AND WE HAVE TO TREAT
PEOPLE OUTSIDE OUR GROUP WITH
THE THEOLOGY OF JUSTICE.
SO WE HAVE TO WIN THE BAT OF
IDEAS.
THAT HAS BEEN TRUE SINCE 9/11
AND STILL TODAY.
>> Woodruff: DO YOU SEE A
CONSENSUS COMING AROUND EITHER
ONE OF THESE IDEAS?
>> I DON'T.
I ENDORSE DAVID'S ASSESSMENT, I
SPECIAL IN THE RELIGION.
JUDY, AFTER NEWTOWN, THE LAST
DEADLIEST MASS KILLING IN THIS
COUNTRY OF THE DIMENSIONS WE HAD
IN SAN BERNARDINO THIS WEEK,
THERE WAS A SENSE OF PERSONAL
TRAGEDY IN THE UNITED STATES, A
LOSS OF THE INDENSE, THE
MURDER -- A LOSS OF INNOCENCE
AND THE MURDER OF CHILDREN AND
EDUCATORS, BUT THERE WASN'T A
SENSE OF WIDE-SPREAD FEAR.
SINCE PARIS, I THINK IT'S FAIR
TO SAY, POLITICALLY, THE
DEMOCRATS HAVE BEEN TONE-DEAF.
THEY HAVE NOT RESPONDED, IN A
SENSE.
IT'S INTERESTING BECAUSE HILLARY
CLINTON, PERHAPS THE MOST
CREDENTIALED OF THE NATIONAL
CANDIDATES IN THIS WHOLE AREA,
SHE DID RESPOND BY CALLING THIS
AN ACT OF TERRORISM EVEN BEFORE
THE F.B.I. DID.
BUT THE RESPONSE -- AND I AGREE
TOTALLY ON GUNS.
IT'S AN OUTRAGE INDEFENSIBLE FOR
THOSE IN THE SENATE YESTERDAY
SAYING HOW FAR WE'VE GOM COM
FROM NEWTOWN, NOT A SIEGE VOTE
CHANGED.
DEMOCRATS VOTED FOR IT IN 2013
EXACTLY THE SAME.
>> Woodruff: FOR GUN CONTROL.
FOR BACKGROUND CHECKS FOR
PEOPLE BUYING GUNS.
FAVORED BY NINE OUT OF TEN
AMERICANS AND BY JOE MANHCIN, A
EMOCDRAT FROM WEST VIRGINIA, GOT
A GRAND TOTAL OF FOUR
REPUBLICANS TO VOTE FOR IT.
JOHN McCAIN, PAT TOOMEY, SUSAN
COLLINS AND THE FOURTH ONE IS
MARK KIRK.
OTHER THAN THAT, EVERY
REPUBLICAN VOTED AGAINST IT.
DEMOCRATS VOTED FOR IT.
YOU BASICALLY ARE FURTHER AWAY.
THE SENATE IS FARTHER APART THIS
TIME THAN TWO YEARS AGO.
BUT I THINK WHAT THE DEMOCRATS
ARE MISSING, AND IT'S NOT EITHER
OR, BUT THIS IS A SENSE OF FEAR
IN THE COUNTRY NOT PRESENT AFTER
NEWTOWN.
AFTER NEWTOWN IS A SENSE OF
WIDESPREAD SYMPATHY AND NATIONAL
TRAGEDY BUT THERE WASN'T THAT
SENSE OF FEAR.
THERE IS A SENSE OF FEAR.
YOU HAVE GREAT BRITAIN AND
GERMANY GOING IN AGAINST
I.S.I.S.
THIS WAS REALLY A SEMINAL EVENT,
PARIS WAS, AND I THINK
SAN BERNARDINO IS JUST ANOTHER
CHAPTER IN THAT.
>> Woodruff: BUT I GUESS MY
QUESTION IS, DAVID, DOES THAT
MEAN NOTHING CHANGES, THAT WE
JUST CONTINUE WITH THE STATUS
QUO?
>> WELL, WE LEARN AND THEN WE
ADAPT.
WHAT'S UNUSUAL ABOUT THIS IS ALL
OUR STEREO TYPES WERE SMASHED.
IF YOU HAVE THE STEREOTYPE OF
THE ATTACKER, IT'S A LONE GUY,
ENGINEERING DEGE.RE
HERE'S A COUPLE, DROP THEIR KID
OFF WITH GRANDMA, THE GUY HAS A
SUCCESSFUL JOB AS AN INSPECTOR,
HOW DO YOU PROFILE THAT.
>> IN THE COMMUNITY.
AND IN THE COMMUNITY.
IT FEELS LIKE IT'S WHAT'S GOING
ON INTERNALLY WITH PEOPLE, NOT
SOME DEMOGRAPHIC FACTOR.
SO THAT'S WHAT MAKES IT SCARY
AND THAT'S WHY IT'S A BATTLE OF
IDEAS, AND THE ONLY THING WE CAN
DO IS LOOK AT WHO'S SWEARING
ALLEGIANCE TO I.S.I.S. OVER
Facebook.
BUT THAT TAKES MASSIVE DATA
SWEEPS.
>> Woodruff: IS ANYBODY
FINDING HIS VOICE ON THIS?
>> THE CANDIDATE DONALD TRUMP,
OBVIOUSLY HAS.
DONALD TRUMP, WHATEVER EVERYONE
SAYS ABOUT HIM, AND LITTLE GOOD
HAS BEEN SAID ON THIS BROADCAST
ABOUT HIM BEGINNING WITH ME, BUT
HE IS NOT HESITANT ABOUT
DESCRIBING WHAT IS HAPPENING
POLITICALLY.
HE TWEETED WHICH DONALD TRUMP
DOES ON A REGULAR BASIS, EVERY
TIME THERE'S A TRAGEDY, HIS
NUMBERS GO UP.
IT'S TRUE.
SINCE PARIS, HE'S RISEN.
>> Woodruff: AND UP TODAY.
AND HE'S UP FURTHER.
IN THE LAST 72 HOURS SINCE
SAN BERNARDINO, MORE GUNS HAVE
BEEN SOLD IN THIS COUNTRY THAN
THE TWO WEEKS OF PRIOR.
THAT'S WHAT I'M TALKING ABOUT,
THAT SENSE OF FEAR.
TRUMP, WHO CONVENTIONAL WISDOM
BEGINNING HERE AS THE MID
ATLANTIC DISTRIBUTOR OF
CONVENTIONAL WISDOM, SAID AFTER
PARIS PEOPLE WOULD GET SERIOUS.
THEY WANT NATIONAL SECURITY
CREDENTIALS, FOREIGN POLICY,
NONE OF WHICH HE HAS BUT HE
SEEMS TO BE STRONGER AND MORE
POPULAR.
>> Woodruff: DO WE HAVE A
SHARPER PICTURE OFH T TIS
REPUBLICAN RACE AS A RESULT OF
THESE TERRORISTS?
>> WELL, AS A NORTHEAST
DISTRIBUTOR OF THE REGION, I
DOUBLE DOWN IT WON'T BE DONE ON
TRUMP.
HE'S UP, UP, UP, BUT, AS I SAID,
WHEN YOU LOOK AT WHEN PEOPLE
MAKE UP THEIR MIND -- NOT PEOPLE
LIKE US, BUT NORMAL AMERICANS,
WHEN THEY PAY ATTENTION, IT'S
THE LAST THREE WEEKS, AND THAT'S
IN IOWA, THE LAST TWO WEEKS IN
NEW HAMPSHIRE, AND THEN JUST
LATER AND LATER, THEY'RE JUST
NOT PAYING ATTENTION.
THERE IS TWO DIFFERENT
DECISION-MAKING PROCESSES THAT
GOES ON.
YOU'RE LOOKING FOR A CAR.
WELL, WHAT CAR MAKES ME FEEL
GOOD?
WELL, MAYBE IT'S THE HOT RED
FERRARI.
WHAT CAR AM I ACTUALLY GOING TO
BUY?
I HAVE SIX KIDS, PROBABLY CAN'T
ALL FIT IN A FERRARI.
SO FOR A COUPLE OF MONTH, YEAH,
I WANT THE FERRARI.
BUT WHEN I ACTUALLY MAKE THE
PURCHASE, I'M GETTING THE DAMN
MINIVAN.
SO I THINK WE'RE IN THE FERRARI
STAGE AND WILL GET IN THE
MINIVAN STAGE WHEN PEOPLE PAY
ATTENTION.
I THINK IT'S TRUE IN MOST OF
MIDDLE AMERICA PEOPLE ARE NOT
PAYING ATTENTION, JUST WANTS
SOMETHING TO MAKE THEM FEEL GOOD
AND TRUMP DOES THAT, BUT WHEN IT
COMES TO THE GUY WITH HIS FINGER
ON THE NUCLEAR TRIGGER, I'M
DOUBLING DOWN ON THIS, THERE
WILL BE A BIG SHIFT IN THE
MENTALITY ABOUT THREE WEEKS OUT.
>> I THINK DONALD TRUMP IS NOT
PRESIDENTIALLY -- HEADNOT HAVE
THE TEMPERAMENT TO BE PRESIDENT.
I'M AMAZED NOBODY ELSE HAS TAKEN
HIM ON, ON THAT ISSUE.
JUST HIS OWN VIDEO CLIPS OF HIS
OUTBURSTS, INTELL ME PRANCE AND
REMARKS AND ABUSIVE TALKS, ONE
DOESN'T EXPECT IN A PRESIDENT.
THE FACT THAT THEY HAVEN'T SAYS
SOMETHING.
MANY PEOPLE HAVE CRITICIZED HIM.
HE ADMITTEDLY CALLED THEM OUT IN
PUBLIC.
THEY DON'T WANT TO BE IN THE
PAPERS OR ON THE RECEIVING END
OF DONALD TRUMP'S PUNCHES.
I THINK ABOUT THIS AND ABOUT
1976 WHEN GEORGE WALLACE WAS
DOMINANT.
HE WAS FEARED BY THE DEMOCRATS.
THE DEMOCRATS WERE TERRIFIED OF
GEORGE WALLACE, ESPECIALLY IN
THE SOUTH.
AND ONE CANDIDATE HAD THE NERVE
AND GUTS TO TAKE HIM ON.
JIMMY CARTER WENT INTO FLORIDA.
NOBODY ELSE WANTED TO GO NEAR
GEORGE WALLACE IN FLORIDA.
JIMMY CARTER WENT IN AND BEAT
HIM AND SAVED THE DEMOCRATIC
PARTY FROM GEORGE WALLACE FROM
HIS NOMINATION OR AT LEAST
SERIOUS CANDIDACY AND EMERGED
HIMSELF.
I DON'T KNOW WHO THE JIMMY
CARTER IS IN THIS REPUBLICAN
FIELD.
KASICH TRIED TO DO IT BUT
DOESN'T SEEM TO BE GETTING
TRACTION, THAT SAYS I'M COMING
IN TO TAKE ON DONALD TRUMP.
THDEMOE CRATS WANT TO RUN
AGAINST HIM AND MAYBE EVERYBODY
AGAIN IS WRONG AND THEY COULD
BE --
>> A COUPLE OF SCARY SCENARIOS
FROM MY POINT OF VIEW, FIRST,
IT'S WORTH POINTING OUT,
GINGRICH WERE UP IN ONE YEAR,
GIULIANI WAS UP IN ONE YEAR.
SO IT'S STILL EARLY.
THE THING THAT COULD HAPPEN IS
TED CRUZ TAKES HIM ON.
CRUZ IS RISING.
>> Woodruff: BUT HE HASN'T
TAKEN TRUMP ON.
>> HE HASN'T TAKEN TRUMP ON.
BUT IF TRUMP BEGINS TO FALTER
MAYBE TED CRUZ WILL TAKE HIM ON.
THE OTHER THING THAT HAPPENS THE
YOU WILL GET A WAR BETWEEN THE
NON-TRUMPS, AND JEB BUSH HAS A
TON OF MONEY, HE GOES AFTER
KASICH AND RUBIO AND THE
NON-TRUMPS ALL DESTROY EACH
OTHER AND CRUZ AND TRUMP ARE
SITTING OUT THERE LOOKING LESS
BAD THAN THE OTHERS.
I'M SAYINGEB J TAKES OUT RUBIO,
YOU KNOW, HE HAS ALL THIS MONEY,
RUNS AGAINST KASICH, WHATEVER HE
NEEDS TO TO BECOME THE
MAINSTREAM CANDIDATE.
THEY SORT OF BUILT RUBBLE ON
THAT SIDE OF THE PARTY.
THEN CRUZ AND TRUMP ARE SITTING
THERE.
>> BECAUSE HE HAS THE MONEY AND
RESOURCES TO STAY.
>> HE DOESN'T HAVE HIS PAC.
WE KNOW THAT'S SEPARATE FROM HIS
CAMPAIGN.
>> OF COURSE.
THAT'S THE LAW.
BUT CHRIS CHRISTIE APPARENTLY
HAS BENEFITED, JUDY, IN
NEW HAMPSHIRE BY PERSONAL
CAMPAIGNING.
>> Woodruff: ENTORSEED BY THE
UNION LEADER.
>> PRESIDENT DUPONT, IN THE NEWT
GINGRICH, PRESIDENT FORBES
(LAUGHTER)
BUT THEY ENDORSED PAT BUCHANAN
AND HE WON IT.
THEY ENDORSED McCAIN IN 2008
AND HE WON IT, TOO.
BUT IT'S NOT NECESSARILY
GUARANTEED A VICTORY, BUT I
THINK THE REASON OF HIS RISE IS
NOT ONLY HIS PERSONAL
CAMPAIGNING IN NEW HAMPSHIRE
WHERE HE'S ESSENTIALLY LIVING
BUT IS, AGAIN, THE NATIONAL
SECURITY.
HE'S THE FORMER U.S. ATTORNEY,
HAS A PROSECUTOR DISGUISE --
>> WHEN YOU TALK TO THE
CANDIDATES, THEY SAY THERE IS
BEEN A SHARP UPTICK IN THE
QUESTIONS AND CONCERNS IT'S
TURNING INTO A NATIONAL SECURITY
ELECTION.
>> Woodruff: WE HEARD IT FROM
BOTH OF YOU TONIGHT.
I WAS TAKING NOTES.
DAVID BROOKS, MARK SHIELDS,
THANK YOU BOTH.
>> Woodruff: WE'LL BE BACK, WITH
A LOOK AT SPIKE LEE'S NEWEST
FILM ON GUN VIOLENCE IN CHICAGO.
BUT FIRST, TAKE THIS MOMENT
TO HEAR FROM YOUR LOCAL PBS
STATION.
IT'S A CHANCE TO OFFER YOUR
SUPPORT, WHICH HELPS KEEP
PROGRAMS LIKE OURS ON THE AIR.
>> Woodruff: FINALLY TONIGHT, A
NEW FILM OPENING TODAY USES
SATIRE TO EXPLORE THE PROBLEM OF
GUN VIOLENCE IN URBAN AMERICA.
IT IS SET IN CHICAGO, WHICH HAS
NOT ONLY SEEN TENSIONS WITH
POLICE, BUT IS STRUGGLING TO
DEAL WITH A HIGHUMBE NR OF
MURDERS.
THE MOVIE IS THE LATEST FROM
DIRECTOR SPIKE LEE, WHO IS NOT
KNOWN TO SHY AWAY FROM CHARGED
SUBJECTS AND THE CONTROVERSY
THAT SOMETIMES COMES WITH THEM.
JEFFREY BROWN HAS OUR STORY.
>> Brown: THE URGENCY BEHINDSPIS
ANNOUNCED RIGHT AT THE TOP.
>> HOMICIDES IN CHICAGO,
ILLINOIS, SURPASSED THE DEATH
TOLL OF AMERICAN SPECIAL FORCES
IN IRAQ.
>> Brown: IT'S CALLED
"CHI-RAQ."
>> WELCOME TO "CHI-RAQ."
>> Brown: THE FORUM IS HIS
AFFORDABLE SATIRE.
AND DEADLY SERIOUS ISSUES OF
GANG VIOLENCE.
IN A WASHINGTON, D.C. MOVIE
THEATER RECENTLY, LEE TOLD ME
WHY HE FELT COMPELLED TO MAKE
THE FILM.
>> WE AS AMERICANS SHOULD NOT BE
OKAY WITH OUR YOUNG PEOPLE BEING
SHOT DOWN IN THE STREET.
>> THE SOUTH SIDE OF CHICAGO IS
A MASS MURDER CAPITAL OF THE
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.
CHICAGO IS THE CANARY IN THE
COAL MINE.
>> Brown: THE EMERGENCY, HE
SEES, GUNS IN AMERICA USED BY
BLACK MEN TO KILL OTHER BLACK
MEN, IN THE SAME CITY.
YOU'RE TELLING A TALE OF TWO
CITIES.
>> CHARLES DICKENS.
>> Brown: LOOKING AT CHICAGO.
I HAVE BEEN MAKING MOVIES
SINCE 1986.
NOTHING I DO IS BY HAPPENSTANCE.
I'M VERY IN COMMAND OF MY CRAFT.
I KNOW WHAT I WANT TO DO.
I KNOW HOW TO DO IT.
>> Brown: IF LEE HAD CHARLES
DICKENS IN MIND, HE LOOKED MOST
DIRECTLY TO AN ANCIENT GREEK
PLAY, ARISTOPENES ASTRADA, IN
WHICH WOMEN BANNED TOGETHER TO
ABSTAIN FROM SEX TO GET THEIR
MEN TO MAKE PEACE.
THE MAIN FEMALE ROLE DECIDES THE
ONLY WAY RIVAL GANGS WILL LAY
DOWN ARMS IS IF WOMEN TAKE A
STAND.
>> YOU KNOW THE POWER WE HAVE
WITHHOLDING JUST A DAY.
IMAGINE A MONTH.
A YEAR!
OH, THEY'RE GONNA BRING THE
PEACE!
>> SATIRE IS A GREAT WAY TO DEAL
WITH SERIOUS SUBJECT MATTER,
WITH ARISTOPHANES, ANCIENT
GREECE, I WORKED WITH STAN
McCUBE RICK WITH DR. STRANGE
LOVE.
IT'S ABOUT THE NUCLEAR
DESTRUCTION, NUCLEAR HOLOCAUST.
WHAT COULD BE MORE SERIOUS THAN
THAT, BUT THAT'S A VERY, VERY
FUNNY FILM.
>> Brown: BLEND SERINGOUS
MATTERS WITH TOUCHE TOUCHES OF R
AND SATURDAY IS HALLRKMA OF
SPIKSPIKE LEE'S FILMS.
SHE'S GOTTA HAVE IT IS ABOUT
ALYOUNG WOMAN BALANCING THREE
SUITORS ONE PLAYED BY LEE
HIMSELF.
>> YOU CAN DO WHAT YOU WANT TO
DO.
>> Brown: THE EXAMINED
COMPLEXITIES OF RACIAL TENSION
IN THIS 1989 BREAKOUT FILM DO
THE RIGHT THING.
AND THE LIFE AND STRUGGLE OF
MALCOLM X IN 1992.
HE'S CONTINUED TO TURN OUT FILMS
YEARLY THOUGH MOST RECENT FILMS
HAVE STRUGGLED TO FIND
COMMERCIAL SUCCESS.
>> EVERYBODY STAY CALM.
DON'T I SEEM CALM TO YOU?
YES, YOU DO.
>> Brown: LAST BOX OFFICE HIT
WAS IN 2006 WITH "INSIDE MAN," A
MORE TRADITIONAL HOLLYWOOD CRIME
THRILLER.
OFTEN ENOUGH THESE FILMS HAVE
BROUGHT CONTROVERSY.
>> I WAS CLEAR I WAS NOT HAPPY
ABOUT THE TITLE.
>> Brown: WITH "CHI-RAQ."
THE CRITICISM FROM LOCAL
CHICAGOANS MOST NOTABLY RAHM
IMMANUEL WHO CHAFED TO HAVING
HIS CITY COMPARED TO IRAQ.
>> I WAS NOT GOING TO CHANGE THE
TITLE OF THE FILM.
THE THE MAYOR NEVER SAID, SPIKE,
DON'T MAKE THIS FILM, THAT NEEDS
TO BE STATED.
HE DID SAY HE DID NOT LIKE THE
TITLE AND THE TITLE HE FELT
WOULD HARM TOURISM AND ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT, WHICH IS NOT TRUE.
>> Brown: IT WON'T?
IT HASN'T.
SO, AGA W TO CHARLES
DICKENS.
THE TALE OF TWO CITIES.
THERE IS TWO CHICAGOS.
AND TOURISM, THERE ARE NO TOUR
BUSES GOING THROUGH THE SOUTH
SIDE OF CHICAGO.
>> Brown: PEOPLE GO TO THE
MOVIES AND THINK OF THEM AS
ENTERTAINMENT, ESCAP BUTE, IS
THIS ART A CALL TO ACTION AS A
KIND OF WITNESS?
>> THERE MAY BE DIFFERENT
AUDIENCES.
YOU CAN HAVE AN ENTERTAINING
FILM THAT MAKES YOU THINK, TOO.
IT DOESN'T HAVE TO BE ONE OR THE
OTHER.
I THINK IN THAT SAME VEIN,
"CHI-RAQ" HAS HUMOR BUT IT'S
VERY SERIOUS SUBJECT MATTER.
NOT EVERYONE WILL WANT TO SEE
"STAR WARS" THIS CHRISTMAS.
I WANT TO SEE IT, BUT THERE ARE
MANY DIFFERENT AUDIENCES.
>> Brown: LEE HAS ALSO BEEN
CRITICAL OF HIS OWN INDUSTRY FOR
LACK OF DIVERSITY INCLUDING A
RECENT REBUKE WHEN HE WAS
AWARDED AN HONORARY OSCAR.
>> THIS INDUSTRY IS SO BEHIND
SPORTS IT'S RIDICULOUS.
IT'S EASY TO BE THE PRESIDENT OF
THE UNITED STATES AS A BLACK
PERSON THAN BE THE HEAD OF
STUDIO.
HONEST.
>> WE NEVER LIKED DIVERSITY.
THE PEOPLE WE LIKE DIRECTLY
AFFECTS WHAT WE SEE BECAUSE
THESE ARE PEOPLE WHO ARE SAY
WE'RE MAKING THIS, WE'RE NOT
MAKING THIS.
SO I HAD AN OPPORTUNITY TO SPEAK
DIRECTLY TO THE HEADS OF
STUDIOS, AND I CHOSE TO TAKE
THAT OPPORTUNITY.
>> Brown: AT 58, SPIKE LEE
SHOWS NO SIGNS OF SLOWING DOWN
AND WHEN ASKED WHERE THAT DRIVE
COMES FROM, HE HAS A SIMPLE
ANSWER.
>> FROM BROOKLYN, NEW YORK, SIR.
I MEAN, IF YOU TAKE THE TIME AND
LOOK AT EVERYBODY WHO CAME OUT
OF BROOKLYN, SOMETHING'S THERE.
>> Brown: IT DRIVES PEOPLE
FORWA TORD A LARGER STAGE.
>> THE REPUBLIC OF BROOKLYN,
NEW YORK.
>> Brown: SPIKE LEE, THANKS SO
MUCH.
>> MY MAN.
>> Woodruff: ON THE NEWSHOUR
ONLINE: FRENCH GRAFFITI ARTISTS
HAVE A LONG HISTORY OF COMBINING
POLITICS AND PUBLIC ART.
WEEKS AFTER THE PARIS ATTACKS,
THEIR MISSION HAS BECOME EVEN
MORE CLEAR, WITH MESSAGES OF
LOVE AND SURVIVAL.
YOU CAN SEE A PHOTO GALLERY OF
SOME OF THEIR STREET ART, ON OUR
HOME PAGE.
AND DON'T FORGET TO SIGN UP FOR
THE NEWSHOUR POLITICS EMAIL.
THIS IS HOW YOU CAN GET OUR
DISCUSSIONS WITH MARK SHIELDS
AND DAVID BROOKS DELIVERED
STRAIGHT TO YOUR INBOX EVERY
FRIDAY.
SIGN UP ON OUR HOME PAGE,
www.pbs.org/newshour.
AND A REMINDER ABOUT
SOME UPCOMING PROGRAMS FROM
OUR PBS COLLEAGUES.
GWEN IFILL IS PREPARING FOR
"WASHINGTON WEEK," WHICH AIRS
LATER THIS EVENING.
HERE'S A PREVIEW:
>> Ifill: AT THE END OF A LONG
WEEK, WE HAVE SO MANY QUESTIONS.
WHAT IS THE FACE OF TERRORISM?
HOW ARE LEADERS RESPONDING?
AND WHAT DO THE PEOPLE WHO
ASPIRE TO LEAD, PLAN TO DO?
WE'LL UPDATE YOU ON THE LATEST,
AND PROVIDE ANALYSIS TOO--
TONIGHT ON "WASHINGTON WEEK."
>> Woodruff: ON PBS NEWSHOUR
WEEKEND SATURDAY, OUR COVERAGE
OF THE SAN BERNARDINO SHOOTING
CONTINUES, WITH THE LATEST FROM
THE INVESTIGATION INTO HOMEGROWN
TERRORISM.
AND WE'LL BE BACK, RIGHT HERE,
ON MONDAY, WITH A LOOK AT THE
SCIENCE OF POLITICAL POLLS, AND
WHAT THEY MIGHT GET WRONG.
THAT'S THE NEWSHOUR FOR TONIGHT.
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
HAVE A GREAT WEEKEND.
THANK YOU AND GOOD NIGHT.